It is a widely held but wrong belief that numbers that are different are evidence of difference. This belief promotes the comparisons that are a fixture of modern business and manufacturing. A current value is compared to a past value, a target value, or an aggregate statistic. When the current value is not as good as it ”should” be (whatever that means), explanations are required and reports must be written. A root cause must be identified and control plans be put in place. Resources are dedicated to addressing what is assumed to be a problem, and improvement is expected to follow.

The trouble with this approach is that it is built on false premise. In the mathematical plan, where values are fixed, numbers that are not the same are always different. But we do not live in the mathematical plane, we live in the real world. In the real world, numbers that are different are NOT always evidence of difference. In fact, two numbers can be different and still represent the same thing. To operate without recognizing this truth is to ignore the fact that variation, whether we like it or not, always exerts an influence.

The Broken Quality Initiative is on a mission to teach the theory and practical skills that make reducing costs and improving the quality of manufactured products possible. We are on a mission to make simple comparisons a thing of the past by teaching engineers how to understand variation through the lens of process behavior charts.

To learn more about process behavior charts and the science of variation, visit [BrokenQuality.com](https://www.brokenquality.com/)